Michael Franz: Hello everybody welcome to the second lecture of the week two.
Michael Franz: And I'm going to talk today about
Michael Franz: Changes in the American electoral process. And in fact, I'm not going to talk for a long time about
Michael Franz: All of the different changes over American history, I think, chapter two, does a really good job of highlighting the major election.
Michael Franz: Periods and major changes in electoral politics. Over the course of American history. I want to highlight what I think are two interesting things that really stand out for me as a
Michael Franz: An observer and as a fan of the electoral process and that first one has to do with the electoral college. And the reason why is because the Electoral College has evolved in many ways over time into really
Michael Franz: A way in which, at least until 2000 a way in which the popular vote found expression, most, most of the time with electoral college get Drees and popular vote victories.
Michael Franz: Since 2000 obviously in the election of 2000 and the election 2016 and very conceivably in the election 2020 the popular vote winner MIGHT NOT BE THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE VOTE winner.
Michael Franz: But that's not really what's interesting to me with respect to Electoral College. Oh, that's interesting in its own right. What's interesting to me about the Electoral College is about its evolution in early American politics.
Michael Franz: If you saw the the musical Hamilton, you know that the election of 1800 turned out to be a tie between Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr and that tie
Michael Franz: Was a fluke and an accident and led to the passage of the 12th Amendment, which created the electoral college that we have today. But even that
Michael Franz: Even though Hamilton is of course fantastic is not the most interesting thing to me with respect to the actual college. It has to do with the way in which electoral college votes are allocated at the state level. And so I want to show you a few things that I posted in week tues module.
Michael Franz: And here we are in week two, which is the American electoral system and
Michael Franz: We're click on here to bring us inside the week to and there's a lot of things that that I want to talk about. But the most important thing here. I want to talk about is this
Michael Franz: Link over here, which is the changes in the allocation of electoral college votes in, you may have seen this in advance of today's of today's of watching today's lecture. And I've shown this to my introduction to American government class in the past, but I want to show
Michael Franz: This in a little more detail today.
Michael Franz: Which is that, you know, at the beginning of American the American Republic, the Electoral College, which itself was not necessarily a theoretically informed choice by the framers, it was more of a compromise choice.
Michael Franz: Between those who wanted popular election of the President, on the one hand, and those who wanted congressional election of the President, much like a Prime Minister's chosen
Michael Franz: Instead, the compromise was the Electoral College, which put the election of the President in the hands of a select group of electors who the number of which is allocated by the number of
Michael Franz: Members of Congress. Each state has and those electors are selected at the state level, who then cast ballots for president and vice president
Michael Franz: Now, in almost every state. In fact, in every state. The winner of the electoral college votes come from in some way or another. The popular votes in those states.
Michael Franz: In Maine and Nebraska we allocate them by congressional district as well. But basically the popular vote determines who wins those votes in that state.
Michael Franz: But that hasn't always been the case. And that's what I find really interesting about the Electoral College and about changes and evolution in the electoral process.
Michael Franz: And you can see that in this graph here, which was made by the group fair boat and one of the neat things about it is that it highlights for us the evolution of an electoral process that was
Michael Franz: Not widely distributed in the early republic into the Jacksonian period what the book calls the second sort of phase of elections in American politics to a more
Michael Franz: democratized process. By the time we hit the 18 late 1820s and early 1830s still of course ballot access was limited to men.
Michael Franz: increasingly less to landed men and more to just and I say men, and I mean white men who may not even who didn't even have to own property in by the 1830s, but nonetheless men and white men and the process of enfranchisement and the access to the ballad, of course, has expanded
Michael Franz: Over time into the 1860s, 1870s, with the passage of the 13th, 14th and 15th amendments and then
Michael Franz: Expansion of the boat to women and then to 18 year olds and so forth. So the process of American history is a process of further enfranchisement of more and more people
Michael Franz: But the early 1830s were a huge democratizing moment where the popular vote of individuals became much more
Michael Franz: And the mass mobilization of voters became much more the goal of elections than it was earlier, which was a more of a genteel elite level democratic system.
Michael Franz: And you can see that in this graph, because this is showing the number of states that allocate the electoral votes in the electoral college by different methods and so
Michael Franz: Statewide popular vote in this red line here is how we vote in electoral college today in almost every state, except for Nebraska and
Michael Franz: In Maine, which is a winner of the state popular vote wins the electoral votes in that state and by 1836. That was the norm in almost every state, except for one or two.
Michael Franz: And that grew, sort of, as you can see sort of exponentially almost from
Michael Franz: Up to 1836. And so this is the moment of transition American politics where we become much more of a mass mobilization democracy and less of an elite almost aristocratic democracy that we were in the early Republican period.
Michael Franz: The other line here. I've noticed the state legislature line.
Michael Franz: Which is the screen line and this shows you that the number of states that allocate their electoral votes based on how the state legislature wants to allocate them.
Michael Franz: And what that means is that the state government decides who gets the electoral votes they might follow the wishes of the popular vote.
Michael Franz: Or there might be no popular vote in a state in these early elections, the state government decided who got the electoral votes and the People's influence was through the election of those state legislators. So if you wanted john adams to win in 1796 you would
Michael Franz: Vote for federalist candidates in your state, knowing that those Federalists if they control the state legislature would give john adams and 1796
Michael Franz: The States electoral votes, but there was no direct popular vote in the state or many of these states well by 1736 that was old news. And of course, we don't have that anymore.
Michael Franz: But if you remember back to Rick hastens article from earlier in the week vacation is concerned that in a controversial 2020 election with a popular vote is contested.
Michael Franz: State legislatures might decide to essentially throw out the popular vote and allocate the electoral votes in that state based on however they decide to do it.
Michael Franz: And that could mean it's possible that Joe Biden could win the popular vote in a close race. Even if it's contested and nobody actually knows that that's really what happened, but the
Michael Franz: Republicans control the state legislature, they could decide to send the electors Trump's way as a way to resolve the popular vote controversy. That's still
Michael Franz: Constitutionally permitted and so we haven't seen state legislators elect to do this in a long time.
Michael Franz: But we may have elections this time around where there's some contest station about the outcome that would compel a state legislature, even a democratic state legislature, if it was close and Trump looks like he might
Michael Franz: Be the winner to do the same thing. And so, but in the early a Republican period I say the really Republic.
Michael Franz: In the early a first number of elections that we had state legislators drove the bus here.
Michael Franz: There are also sometimes district level allocation these blue lines are essentially popular votes but much like main does them allocated by districts as opposed to statewide vote.
Michael Franz: Now these data come from a lawsuit that was filed in in 1966 and so we don't often get to get to see you getting these data are not
Michael Franz: Are not always easy because finding state laws and getting comprehensive analysis of state laws back in time, it's not
Michael Franz: It's not, it's not always accessible. So if I click on this lawsuit. I go to. I think I have to go to page maybe 22 yeah
Michael Franz: You'll see Exhibit B and the lawsuit, which is a scan document and it shows us the allocation of electoral votes by elections between 1788 and 1836. This is what I would call super cool data. Right. And there are a lot of
Michael Franz: Footnotes in here that you have to kind of puzzle over a little bit to get the right footnote number. See, that's kind of hard to read.
Michael Franz: But the point of the matter is this, which is that by 1836 almost all of the states in the union at the time.
Michael Franz: Allocated their votes on what is called the general general ticket, which in the footnote over here you see GT general ticket or by the people. That's a popular vote allocation.
Michael Franz: Of the Electoral College. So by 1836 we were running presidential elections, just like we do. Now in fact by 1832 we were actually running presidential elections, much like we do.
Michael Franz: Now, except for one state state of South Carolina, which was holding on to this L designation, which is the legislature decided who won the electoral votes in the state, but by 1832
Michael Franz: The democratic system has really expanded to popular vote to the President, more or less, through the electoral college system and much the way we see it today.
Michael Franz: Of course nomination of presidential candidates.
Michael Franz: Was very different at 32 than it is in 2020 and there weren't any primaries and caucuses, like we had them today that would come later. And who could vote in these elections was not accessible as it is today to all citizens of the United States.
Michael Franz: But the process of counting popular votes has been around now for about 190 years but just four years prior. And this is important to to remember. Or maybe you should say eight years prior in 1824 we still had Legislature's
Michael Franz: running the show in a lot of states you have five or six states in 1824 let's say like New York State like Delaware, South Carolina, Georgia, Vermont, Louisiana.
Michael Franz: Allocating their votes based off of legislative Egypt and in early elections, like an 1800 1804 and, you know, eight we see those same handful of states and a few additional ones.
Michael Franz: Allocating their votes by the legislative decisions, not the decisions of the people. But what shouldn't be forgotten, is that
Michael Franz: As far back as 1788 and even into the early elections of 1792 and 1796 there were some states that use popular vote to allocate the electoral votes and in 1788. In fact, you see 123456 states.
Michael Franz: Less than half allocate the electoral votes by legislators and the other half roughly give some choice to the people and in 1792 the number of legislative allocations expands a bit
Michael Franz: But there's still some elections, like in New Hampshire that still have popular vote.
Michael Franz: And we capture is a fascinating story because an 1800 they switch over to legislative allocation of electoral votes, and that's just a random occurrence that must have something to do with the State's interest in
Michael Franz: One of the candidates and making sure that one of the candidates got the electoral votes they just switch. An 1800 and switch back in 1804
Michael Franz: But an 1800 there were a lot of legislators in state governments that we're allocating electoral votes. And so you can see in this
Michael Franz: In this evolution over time, the way in which, as the book talks about the Jacksonian period emerges and mobilization of voters becomes so much more important to presidential politics so much more important in fact than it had been in previous years. Now I'll say also that
Michael Franz: House races would always had always been general election popular vote state governments were always electing their state legislators through popular votes.
Michael Franz: The Presidential, of course, as I just talked about is a little different and evolved into the 1830s.
Michael Franz: But Senate elections were still decided by state governments senators were appointed by states, not by the people until the early 1900s, and by the time we get
Michael Franz: The 17th amendment in the early 1900s, which is a popular election of senators senators were still sent to Congress by state governments, not by people
Michael Franz: Now we're in a situation where every elected office is determined by the vote of the people and not by the vote of another legislative body and so that evolution over time, I think is super interesting. And it is a reminder of the early changes in our American democratic system.
Michael Franz: That happened pretty quickly between 1788 1836 48 years we have ended the way we elected our president in a couple different times, both with the 12th Amendment changing the way the Electoral College worked. And then also, through this process, seeing here.
Michael Franz: The other thing I want to say, just really quickly is that the book discusses how politics has always been negative
Michael Franz: There are certain things that have changed over time, technology has changed the role of political parties has changed.
Michael Franz: The, the power of candidates relative to party organizations has changed access to the ballot has changed, but many things have stayed someone the same and some things that have remained constant include like
Michael Franz: The role of negative politics. We've always had negative politics. We've always attacked the opposition and we've always said nasty things about opponents in campaigns.
Michael Franz: But I don't want to overstate that continuity. In fact, I think it's important to note that, in fact, we've seen evidence in the last number of years that negativity in modern American politics has gone up.
Michael Franz: And I want to show you something that's in our module.
Michael Franz: By going back to the screen before and going over here. I've posted a graph for us, which I explained here in Blackboard but shows the percentage of political advertisements between 1916
Michael Franz: And 2016 that are negative, that are classified as attacks on the opponent and in the 1960s and I use a couple different data sources which I described
Michael Franz: But in the 1960 presidential election between Richard Nixon and john kennedy negative ads were not that common. In fact, even though we were here in the book about vicious attacks on the early founders amongst each other. And of course, if you see Hamilton, they oftentimes hated each other.
Michael Franz: And said, terrible things about each other, but in the modern American period negative advertisements have grown sort of literally linearly in the last
Michael Franz: 60 years 5060 years over the course of this graph were over the, you know, looking at presidential elections between 1960 in 1996 negativity grew
Michael Franz: almost doubled as a percentage of all messages that presidential candidates produced in the presidential and congressional context in the last 20 years negativity and advertisements.
Michael Franz: Has gone up again about double from maybe around 30% of the ads that aired on TV in the election of 2002 near 60% of the ads in the presidential race in the last couple of presidential elections.
Michael Franz: We've also seen increases in negativity in the congressional races House and Senate as well. So negativity has been around for a long time, but there have been ebbs and flows and how much negativity, we had in the middle of the 20th century negativity was
Michael Franz: Always present, but maybe not a feature of the electoral process, whereas today. It very much is a feature and is a dominant feature of our electoral process.
Michael Franz: So continuity and change the messages of American electoral politics, if you will. And I think that's where I'll stop today and I look forward to our discussion about this and other things raised in in the chapter for it for today. And, and I look forward to talking with you soon.
Michael Franz: Take care.